\documentclass[10pt,]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage[margin=1.0in]{geometry}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={Department Invited Speakers Do Not Reflect Trainee Diversity},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}

  \title{\textbf{Department Invited Speakers Do Not Reflect Trainee Diversity}}
    \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
    \author{}
    \preauthor{}\postauthor{}
    \date{}
    \predate{}\postdate{}
  
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{array}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage[table]{xcolor}
\usepackage{wrapfig}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{colortbl}
\usepackage{pdflscape}
\usepackage{tabu}
\usepackage{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}
\usepackage{makecell}
\usepackage{caption}

\usepackage{helvet} % Helvetica font
\renewcommand*\familydefault{\sfdefault} % Use the sans serif version of the font
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}

\usepackage[none]{hyphenat}

\usepackage{setspace}
\doublespacing
\setlength{\parskip}{1em}

\usepackage{lineno}

\usepackage{pdfpages}
\floatplacement{figure}{H} % Keep the figure up top of the page

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\vspace{30mm}

Running title: Invited Speaker Diversity Does Not Reflect Trainee
Diversity

\vspace{35mm}

Ada K. Hagan, Ph.D.\({^1\dagger}\), Rebecca M. Pollet, Ph.D.\({^1}\),
and Josie Libertucci, Ph.D.\({^2\dagger}\)

\vspace{35mm}

\(\dagger\) To whom correspondence should be addressed:
\href{mailto:akhagan@umich.edu}{\nolinkurl{akhagan@umich.edu}} or
\href{mailto:libertj@mcmaster.ca}{\nolinkurl{libertj@mcmaster.ca}}

1. Department of Microbiology \& Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan

2. Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada

Figures: 1

Tables: 1

Supplemental:

\newpage

\linenumbers

\subsection{Abstract}\label{abstract}

\subsection{Keywords}\label{keywords}

inclusion, diversity, invited speakers, academia, graduate programs

\newpage

\subsection{Background}\label{background}

500 words

Representation of white women and historically underrepresented
minorities (HURM) in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
in the workforce remains low despite equal enrollment in undergraduate
STEM majors. Longitudinal data indicates that these discrepancies might
be partially explained by low retention of women and URM in
undergraduate STEM programs where academic performance is a key
predictor of retention. A growing body of evidence suggests that women
and URM under-perform in introductory science courses compared to their
white male colleagues, even when representation is equal. Additionally,
there is evidence to suggest that women and URM participate less in
class, which could inhibit the learning process and subsequent success.
A prevailing hypothesis to explain achievement gaps and a lack of
participation in class for women and URM is that, many students have an
unconscious fear of being seen as a negative stereotype, termed
stereotype threat. This is prevalent in fields that have historically
been dominated by white males, such as in STEM. In order to retain a
diverse population of students in STEM, in an effort to ensure all
students have equal opportunities and resources to be successful,
under-performance and a lack of participation in introductory science
courses needs to be addressed. One mechanism to address the issue is
through the use of inclusive teaching practices --teaching methods that
promote the full participation, learning, and success of all students.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  introduce invited speaker series - what are the goals, who attends,
  etc.
\item
  previous examinations have focused on conferences and panels, large
  number of people in a short period of time -- easy to make comparisons
  \& see trends
\item
  more difficult to see trends over long time period -- asked cumulative
  trends of speakers over 5 year period, ``normative'' to trainees in
  the department
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}

Each academic year, each faculty member in the Department of
Microbiology and Immunology at the University of Michigan has the
opportunity to invite one speaker per year for a weekly seminar series.
Some of these seminar slots are dedicated to named lectureships, which
are decided by committee, and three trainee-invited speakers. We
analyzed the demographics of invited speakers and faculty hosts for five
academic years (Fall 2014 - Spring 2019), and compared them to the
current trainees when the data were analyzed (Spring 2019). Each speaker
was only counted once and those listed as departmental faculty members
or as a ``host'' at any point could not also be considered ``invited
speakers''. The list of faculty hosts was used as a proxy for faculty
demographics since as hosts, these faculty members are visible
representatives of the department. The trainee lists were obtained from
department listservs that included masters students, doctoral students,
and post-doctoral fellows.

We hand-coded demographics using personal knowledge, photos, and CVs.
The presenting gender of each individual was assigned using a binary
system (man/woman). Diversity definitions vary according to the goals
and population in question. However, in the United States, there is an
inclination to consider both together. We believe that it is important
to distinguish between individuals of historically under-represented
minority (HURM) and international backgrounds since each face different
issues in the US and the academy and thus require different support
systems. For instance, international scientists must contend with visa
issues while HURMs have the trauma associated with living in a country
who systematically shuts them out (despite an infrastructure that was
built on their historical land and labor). For this reason, other
assigned demographics included Caucasian, Historically Under-represented
Minority (HURM), and International, each with a binary (yes/no)
possibilty. Caucasian was assigned using the current U.S. Census
definition where those of Middle Eastern, European, and Russian descent
are included. HURM individuals were restricted to those with
African-American, Indigenous and/or Hispanic heritage while
International individuals were either visiting the US at the time of
their seminar, or immigrated to the US as an adult.

\subsection{Results}\label{results}

To understand the representation of women, we compared the proportion of
women in each academic role. At the trainee level, more than half of
students and postdoctoral fellows were women. That dropped to 46.77\% of
faculty hosts and 38.73\% of the invited speakers (Fig. 1A). Of 27
lectureships over the five year period, 37.04\% were awarded to women.
The proportion of women as faculty hosts and speakers is equivalent to
global estimates that 40\% of microbiologists are women (Elseiver), with
a slightly lower representation of women in lectureships.

Our analysis identified an over-representation of Caucasian individuals
as hosting faculty and invited speakers, relative to the proportion of
Caucasian trainees (Fig. 1B). We also observed declines in the
representation of HURM and international faculty and speakers relative
to the trainees, particularly postdocs (Fig 1B). Caucasian scientists
also dominated lectureships, comprising 81.48\% of those awarded (Fig.
1C). Three and six lectureships were awarded to HURM and International
scientists, respectively. Because the intersection of identities can
compound biases and outcomes, we further examined the more prestigous
lectureships by gender and Caucasian status. Caucasian men and women
accounted for 44.44\% and 37.04\% of the lectureships, respectively,
compared to 18.52\% non-Caucasian men and zero non-Caucasian women (Fig.
1D).

\subsection{Discussion}\label{discussion}

Several papers have investigated the representation of women at
scientific conferences, however, we have only identified one that
focused on invited speakers at universities (Nittrouer, 2018). In their
study, Nittrouer et. al., examined 3,652 talks at 50 U.S. institutions
in 2013 - 2014 and found that women faculty are less likely to be
invited speakers, despite similar acceptance rates.

These results suggest that women faculty are less likely to invited as
speakers, a decision that may be negatively impacted by assumptions
about competency and dedication. The dedication of women who have
children to their work is perceived to be less than that of their
colleagues, e.g., men who also have children. The perceived
prioritization and commitments of women to family over work may cause
faculty to doubt their acceptance of a speaking invitation (despite the
prestigious nature of these invitations and evidence to the contrary),
causing the faculty member to invite a different colleague who they feel
is more likely to agree. Departments have different processes and
criteria for selecting invited speakers, but want to bring the best
scientists possible. It may also be that the definition of ``best''
poses a problem to women, who need three-times as many publications as
their men colleges to be considered equally competent. Some departments
only invite tenured faculty, which severely limits the number of
potential women speakers. Alternately, pre-tenure faculty members invite
prestigious, tenured faculty in their field to network and secure
letters for their own tenure package. The increased burden of women to
prove competency decreases their likelihood to be considered for either
tenure and as possible source of tenure letters.

\subsection{Call to Action}\label{call-to-action}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Improving speaker diversity

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    US-serving institutions have particular responsibility to those
    historically suppressed populations
  \item
    to improve retention of white women \& HURMs, each group needs
    equivalent representation to counteract biases and improve
    self-efficacy
  \item
    recall bias not the only issue, also not always possible to identify
    members of historically under-served communities
  \item
    example: there are speakers who have URM status, but it wasn't
    readily apparent from the internet/CV
  \item
    perspective is often as/more important than self-identification
  \end{itemize}
\item
  Development of Diversify tools

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    inspired by EEB/Chemistry
  \item
    tool for members of URM groups to self-identify \& for others to use
    to find diverse candidates
  \item
    describe maintenance of lists (Rebecca)
  \item
    describe website creation
  \end{itemize}
\item
  Other resources/ideas

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    student/lab invited speakers -- improve diversity of suggestions
    (fields/careers)
  \item
    departments to invite speakers to share about their personal story
    as well as their science
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  increased retention of white women \& HURMS -- increasing
  representation of
\item
  tools available to create field specific lists of H under-served
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Acknowledgements}\label{acknowledgements}

We thank Dr.~Harry Mobley and the Department of Microbiology \&
Immunology, University of Michigan for their input and financial support
that enabled publication of our manuscript. We would also like to
acknowledge Nick Lesniak and Dr.~Ariangela Kozick for their comments and
suggestions.

\subsection{Author Contributions}\label{author-contributions}

A.K.H. collected the data, assigned demographics, analyzed the data, and
created the website. R.M.P. created the Google lists, forms, and website
content and the description of their maintenance. J.L. wrote the
introduction and provided conceptual advice. All authors contributed to
the final manuscript.

\subsection{Code and data
availability}\label{code-and-data-availability}

The anonymized data, code for all analysis steps, and an Rmarkdown
version of this manuscript is available at
\url{https://github.com/akhagan/Hagan_Libertucci_SpeakerDiversity_XXXX_2019/}.
Template and complete instructions for generating a field-specific
Diversity website are available at
\url{https://github.com/diversifymicrobiology/DiversifyMicrobiology.github.io/}.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{Figure_1.png}
\caption{Figure 1.}
\end{figure}

\newpage

\begin{center}
\captionof{table}{List of suggestions and resources to increase invited speaker diversity.}
\small
\begin{tabular}{|l|l|l|}
\hline

\rowcolor{lightgray}
\textbf{Suggestion} & \textbf{Description} & \textbf{Resource} \\ \hline

Lab-invited speakers & \makecell[l]{Faculty members can request \\suggestions from trainees} & \\ \hline

Use a list & \makecell[l]{Many lists of scientists from \\under-represented and underserved \\groups are available} &  \makecell[l]{https://DiversifyMicrobiology.\\github.io/resources}\\ \hline

Create a list & \makecell[l]{Use the GitHub template \\ create a self-nomination list and \\resource for your field} & \makecell[l]{https://github.com/diversifymicrobiology/\\DiversifyMicrobiology.github.io} \\ \hline

Highlight the journey & \makecell[l]{Invite all speakers to spend \\a few moments describing their \\personal science journey} & \\ \hline

\end{tabular}
\end{center}

\newpage

\subsection{References}\label{references}

\hypertarget{refs}{}


\end{document}
